Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the endocrine pancreas and the control of blood glucose.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the endocrine pancreas and its hormones.
The endocrine pancreas, through its hormones insulin and glucagon,
is the principal regulator of the body's fuel metabolism,
particularly the blood glucose, and an understanding of its organisation and
hormones is the foundation of the subject, so it is worth setting out.
The pancreas is both an exocrine gland, secreting digestive juice,
and an endocrine gland; the endocrine part consists of the islets of Langerhans,
clusters of endocrine cells scattered through the pancreas.
The islets contain several cell types, producing different hormones.
The beta cells, the most numerous, produce insulin,
the principal hormone of the fed state,
which lowers the blood glucose and promotes the storage of fuel.
The alpha cells produce glucagon, the principal hormone of the fasting state,
which raises the blood glucose and mobilises fuel;
so insulin and glucagon are broadly opposing.
Other cells produce somatostatin, which inhibits both, and other peptides.
The two principal hormones, insulin and glucagon, act chiefly on the liver,
muscle and fat — the tissues of fuel storage and use — to regulate the metabolism
and storage of the energy substrates,
and so to control the blood glucose between the fed and fasting states.
So the endocrine pancreas, the islets of Langerhans,
contains the beta cells producing insulin — the hormone of the fed state,
lowering blood glucose and promoting storage — the alpha cells producing glucagon —
the hormone of the fasting state, raising blood glucose and mobilising fuel — and
cells producing somatostatin and other peptides; the opposing insulin and glucagon,
acting on the liver, muscle and fat,
being the principal regulators of fuel metabolism and the blood glucose.
Describe the actions of insulin.
Insulin is the principal anabolic hormone, the hormone of the fed state,
and its actions — lowering the blood glucose and promoting the storage of fuel —
are central to metabolism, so they are worth describing in some detail.
Insulin is a peptide hormone, secreted by the beta cells when nutrients,
particularly glucose, are plentiful — in the fed state.
Its overall effect is to promote the uptake,
use and storage of the absorbed nutrients, and so to lower the blood glucose.
Its actions on the principal tissues are: on the liver,
it promotes the uptake and storage of glucose as glycogen,
and inhibits the production of glucose,
so reducing the glucose released into the blood; on the muscle,
it promotes the uptake of glucose — by stimulating the insertion of glucose
transporters — and its storage and use,
and the uptake of amino acids and the synthesis of protein; on the fat,
it promotes the uptake of glucose and the synthesis and storage of fat,
and inhibits the breakdown of fat.
So, across these tissues, insulin lowers the blood glucose — by promoting its
uptake into muscle and fat and its storage in the liver,
and inhibiting its production — and promotes the storage of all three fuel types,
being anabolic.
It is the only hormone that lowers the blood glucose.
Its lack, or resistance to it, causes diabetes mellitus.
So insulin, the hormone of the fed state, promotes the uptake,
use and storage of nutrients: in the liver,
storing glucose as glycogen and inhibiting glucose production; in muscle,
promoting glucose uptake, storage and protein synthesis; in fat,
promoting fat synthesis and storage;
thereby lowering the blood glucose — the only hormone to do so — and acting as the
principal anabolic, storage hormone, its lack causing diabetes.
Describe the actions of glucagon and the counter-regulatory hormones.
Opposing insulin are glucagon and the other counter-regulatory hormones,
which raise the blood glucose and mobilise fuel,
and an understanding of these is important,
as they defend against hypoglycaemia and operate in the fasting and stressed states.
Glucagon is the principal hormone opposing insulin,
secreted by the alpha cells in the fasting state, when the blood glucose falls;
its overall effect is to raise the blood glucose, acting chiefly on the liver,
where it stimulates the breakdown of glycogen to release glucose,
and the production of new glucose — gluconeogenesis — and the mobilisation of fat;
so it raises the blood glucose and provides fuel during fasting.
Besides glucagon, several other hormones raise the blood glucose — the
counter-regulatory hormones, which oppose insulin: the catecholamines, adrenaline,
released in stress and hypoglycaemia, which mobilise glucose and fat; cortisol,
which promotes gluconeogenesis; and growth hormone.
These provide a defence against hypoglycaemia — several overlapping mechanisms to
raise a falling glucose — reflecting the danger of a low glucose to the brain;
and they raise the glucose in stress, when fuel is needed,
contributing to the hyperglycaemia of the stress response.
So glucagon, the principal counter-regulatory hormone,
is secreted in fasting and raises the blood glucose by stimulating the liver to
break down glycogen and make new glucose and to mobilise fat;
and the other counter-regulatory hormones — the catecholamines,
cortisol and growth hormone — also raise the glucose,
providing a defence against hypoglycaemia and raising the glucose in stress;
the opponents of insulin in the control of fuel metabolism.
Describe the control of insulin secretion.
The secretion of insulin is controlled chiefly by the blood glucose itself,
in a direct feedback that matches the insulin to the need,
and an understanding of this control, including the mechanism in the beta cell,
is worth having.
The principal controller of insulin secretion is the blood glucose:
a rise in the blood glucose, as after a meal,
stimulates the beta cells to secrete insulin, which then lowers the glucose;
and a fall in the glucose reduces the secretion.
So the beta cell senses the glucose and secretes insulin in proportion — a direct
negative feedback regulating the glucose.
The mechanism in the beta cell is instructive:
the glucose is taken up and metabolised by the beta cell, generating ATP;
the rise in ATP closes ATP-sensitive potassium channels in the cell membrane;
this depolarises the cell, opening voltage-gated calcium channels;
and the entering calcium triggers the secretion of insulin.
This mechanism is the target of drugs: the sulphonylurea drugs, used in diabetes,
close these same potassium channels to stimulate insulin secretion.
Besides glucose, insulin secretion is stimulated by other nutrients — amino acids
and fats — by gut hormones released in anticipation of absorption — the incretins,
enhancing the response to a meal — and modulated by the autonomic nervous system.
So insulin secretion is controlled chiefly by the blood glucose:
a rise stimulating the beta cells, in a direct negative feedback;
the mechanism being that glucose metabolism raises ATP, closing potassium channels,
depolarising the cell, and admitting calcium to trigger secretion — the target of
the sulphonylurea drugs; with additional stimulation by other nutrients,
the incretin gut hormones, and autonomic modulation — a control matching the
insulin to the glucose.
Describe the integrated control of blood glucose in the fed and fasting states.
The blood glucose is held within a fairly narrow range despite the intermittent
intake of food, by the integrated, opposing actions of insulin and the
counter-regulatory hormones, and drawing together how the body handles the fed and
fasting states illustrates this regulation.
The aim is to keep the blood glucose adequate — above all for the brain,
which depends on it — while storing the excess after meals and releasing it between
them. In the fed state, after a meal, the blood glucose rises;
this stimulates insulin and suppresses glucagon.
The insulin promotes the uptake and storage of the glucose — as glycogen in the
liver and muscle, and as fat — and the use of glucose as fuel,
and it inhibits the liver's production of glucose;
so the glucose is cleared from the blood into the stores,
and the level returns towards normal.
In the fasting state, between meals, the blood glucose tends to fall;
this suppresses insulin and stimulates glucagon.
The glucagon, and the low insulin, cause the liver to release glucose — first by
breaking down its glycogen store, and then, in prolonged fasting,
by making new glucose from other substrates — maintaining the blood glucose for the
brain; the other tissues, meanwhile, switch to using fat for fuel, sparing glucose.
So the opposing hormones, controlled by the glucose,
switch the body between storage and release.
So the blood glucose is kept constant by the opposing, glucose-controlled hormones:
in the fed state, the rise in glucose stimulating insulin to promote uptake and
storage and clear the glucose; in the fasting state,
the fall suppressing insulin and stimulating glucagon,
so the liver releases glucose from glycogen and then gluconeogenesis while other
tissues use fat — maintaining the glucose for the brain — an integrated regulation
switching between storage and release.
Describe the pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes mellitus, the commonest and most important endocrine disorder,
results from a deficiency of insulin or resistance to it,
and an understanding of its pathophysiology follows from the actions of insulin,
so it is worth describing.
Diabetes mellitus is a disorder of a lack of insulin action — either an absolute
deficiency of insulin, or a resistance of the tissues to it with a relative
deficiency — resulting in a raised blood glucose and disturbed metabolism.
There are two main types.
Type one diabetes results from the destruction, usually autoimmune,
of the beta cells, causing an absolute deficiency of insulin;
it typically presents younger and requires insulin treatment.
Type two diabetes, far commoner, results from a combination of resistance to
insulin and an inadequate insulin secretion;
it is associated with obesity and presents later.
The lack of insulin action produces the consequences.
The blood glucose rises, because the glucose is not taken up and stored and the
liver overproduces it; when it exceeds the renal threshold,
glucose appears in the urine, drawing water with it — the osmotic diuresis causing
the thirst and polyuria.
The lack of insulin also unrestrains the breakdown of fat and protein.
In severe type one diabetes, the unrestrained fat breakdown produces ketoacidosis,
a dangerous metabolic emergency.
In the long term, the raised glucose damages the blood vessels and nerves,
causing the chronic complications.
So diabetes mellitus results from an absolute deficiency of insulin,
as in the autoimmune type one, or resistance with relative deficiency,
as in the obesity-associated type two;
the lack of insulin action raising the blood glucose — causing the osmotic
diuresis, thirst and polyuria — and unrestraining fat breakdown,
which can cause ketoacidosis in type one;
with long-term vascular and nerve damage — a disorder following from the loss of
insulin's actions.
Describe the anaesthetic implications of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes is common and has important anaesthetic implications,
both from the disturbance of glucose control around surgery and from the long-term
complications of the disease, so it is worth drawing these together.
The implications are of two kinds: the management of the blood glucose,
and the complications of the disease.
The control of the blood glucose is disturbed perioperatively:
the stress of surgery, through the counter-regulatory hormones,
raises the glucose and the need for insulin,
while the fasting and the altered routine disturb the usual balance;
so the glucose must be monitored and managed through the perioperative period,
avoiding both dangerous hyperglycaemia — and, in type one, ketoacidosis — and,
importantly, hypoglycaemia, which is dangerous and may be masked by anaesthesia;
this is managed by appropriate adjustment of the diabetic treatment,
and often an insulin and glucose regimen for major surgery.
The long-term complications of diabetes affect the anaesthetic:
the cardiovascular disease, which is common and may be silent,
increasing the cardiac risk; the renal impairment; the autonomic neuropathy,
causing cardiovascular instability and delayed gastric emptying with aspiration
risk; the peripheral neuropathy; and effects such as a potentially difficult airway
and an increased risk of infection.
So the diabetic patient requires careful perioperative management.
So diabetes has anaesthetic implications from the disturbance of glucose control —
the stress and fasting of surgery requiring the glucose to be monitored and
managed, avoiding hyperglycaemia, ketoacidosis and the dangerous,
masked hypoglycaemia, often with an insulin-glucose regimen — and from the
complications of the disease — the common, often silent cardiovascular disease,
the renal impairment, the autonomic neuropathy with instability and aspiration
risk, and the infection risk — requiring careful perioperative management.
Pull it together: how is the body's fuel metabolism regulated,
and why does it matter to anaesthesia?
I would draw the endocrine pancreas together around the regulation of the body's
fuel metabolism by the opposing hormones insulin and glucagon,
centred on the blood glucose, and its importance to anaesthesia through diabetes
and the stress response.
The central task is to keep the blood glucose adequate — above all for the brain,
which depends on it — while storing the surplus after meals and mobilising fuel
between them.
This is achieved by the opposing hormones of the islets,
controlled by the glucose itself: insulin, the hormone of the fed state,
secreted when the glucose rises, promoting its uptake and storage and lowering it —
the only glucose-lowering hormone, and anabolic; and glucagon,
with the other counter-regulatory hormones — the catecholamines,
cortisol and growth hormone — secreted in fasting and stress,
mobilising fuel and raising the glucose, defending against hypoglycaemia.
The system switches the body between storage and release.
Its importance to anaesthesia is great. Diabetes, the failure of insulin action,
is common, and requires the perioperative management of the glucose and attention
to its complications.
And the stress response to surgery, through the counter-regulatory hormones,
raises the glucose, which interacts with this control.
So the body's fuel metabolism is regulated by the opposing,
glucose-controlled hormones — insulin promoting storage and lowering the glucose,
glucagon and the counter-regulatory hormones mobilising fuel and raising it,
defending the brain's glucose supply and switching between the fed and fasting
states; mattering to anaesthesia through diabetes,
requiring perioperative glucose management and attention to complications,
and through the hyperglycaemia of the surgical stress response — the endocrine
control of fuel metabolism, of central anaesthetic relevance.
Describe the mechanism of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in the beta cell.
The way the beta cell senses glucose and secretes insulin in response is an elegant
mechanism, and its understanding is worth having,
as it explains the control of insulin and the action of important drugs.
The beta cell must secrete insulin in proportion to the blood glucose,
and it does so by a mechanism that couples the metabolism of glucose to the
secretion of insulin. The steps are these.
Glucose enters the beta cell and is metabolised, generating ATP;
so a rise in the blood glucose raises the ATP within the cell.
The rise in ATP closes ATP-sensitive potassium channels in the cell membrane —
channels that, when open, hold the cell polarised by letting potassium out.
Their closure depolarises the cell membrane.
The depolarisation opens voltage-gated calcium channels,
and calcium flows into the cell. The rise in intracellular calcium triggers the
exocytosis of the insulin-containing granules, releasing insulin.
So the glucose, through its metabolism and ATP, is coupled to insulin secretion.
This mechanism is the target of drugs: the sulphonylurea drugs,
used in type two diabetes, bind to and close these same ATP-sensitive potassium
channels, depolarising the cell and stimulating insulin secretion independently of
glucose; and the channel is affected in certain conditions.
So glucose-stimulated insulin secretion works by glucose entering the beta cell and
being metabolised to raise ATP, which closes ATP-sensitive potassium channels,
depolarising the cell; this opens voltage-gated calcium channels,
and the entering calcium triggers the release of insulin — a mechanism coupling
glucose to insulin secretion, and the target of the sulphonylurea drugs,
which close the same channels to stimulate secretion.
Describe the incretin effect and the gut hormones in glucose control.
The control of insulin secretion involves not only the blood glucose but signals
from the gut — the incretin effect — and an understanding of this is worth having,
as it is physiologically important and the basis of newer diabetes drugs.
The incretin effect is the observation that glucose taken by mouth stimulates a
greater secretion of insulin than the same amount of glucose given intravenously to
produce the same blood level; the difference is due to signals from the gut.
When nutrients are absorbed from the gut,
the gut releases hormones — the incretins — into the blood,
which act on the beta cells to enhance the secretion of insulin in response to
glucose.
So the gut, in effect, signals to the pancreas that a meal is being absorbed,
priming and enhancing the insulin response in anticipation and in proportion to the
nutrient absorption — a feed-forward control that augments the glucose-stimulated
secretion.
The principal incretins are gut peptides released in response to a meal.
The incretin effect is reduced in type two diabetes.
Its importance is increased by its being the basis of newer classes of diabetes
drug: drugs that mimic the incretin action,
or that prevent the rapid breakdown of the natural incretins,
enhancing the insulin response to meals; these have become important treatments.
So the incretin effect is the enhancement of insulin secretion by gut hormones —
the incretins — released when nutrients are absorbed,
which act on the beta cells to augment the glucose-stimulated insulin response,
a feed-forward signal that a meal is being absorbed; reduced in type two diabetes,
and the basis of newer diabetes drugs that mimic or prolong the incretin action —
an important component of glucose control.
Describe the metabolic adaptations to fasting and starvation.
The body has an ordered series of adaptations to maintain its fuel supply,
particularly the glucose for the brain, during fasting and starvation,
and an understanding of these draws together the hormonal control of metabolism,
so it is worth describing.
The challenge of fasting is to maintain the blood glucose,
on which the brain depends, when no glucose is being absorbed,
and to provide fuel for the other tissues,
while the body has only limited glucose stores.
The adaptations proceed in stages, driven by the fall in insulin and the rise in
glucagon and the other counter-regulatory hormones.
In the first hours of fasting, the blood glucose is maintained by the breakdown of
the liver's glycogen store — glycogenolysis — releasing glucose;
but this store is limited and is exhausted within about a day.
Thereafter, the blood glucose is maintained by gluconeogenesis — the liver making
new glucose from other substrates, chiefly the amino acids from the breakdown of
protein, and glycerol from fat.
Meanwhile, to spare glucose, the other tissues switch to using fat as their fuel:
fat is mobilised and oxidised, and the liver converts it into ketone bodies,
which can be used as fuel by the tissues and, importantly, in prolonged starvation,
by the brain — which adapts to use ketones,
so reducing its glucose requirement and sparing the body's protein.
So the body adapts to fasting by progressively shifting to fat and ketones while
defending the glucose for the brain.
So the adaptations to fasting maintain the glucose for the brain and provide fuel:
first by the breakdown of hepatic glycogen, exhausted within a day;
then by gluconeogenesis from amino acids and glycerol;
while the other tissues switch to fat, the liver making ketone bodies,
which the brain comes to use in prolonged starvation,
sparing protein — an ordered series driven by the fall in insulin and rise in
counter-regulatory hormones, drawing together the hormonal control of metabolism.
Describe diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a dangerous acute complication of diabetes,
chiefly of type one, and its understanding follows directly from the actions of
insulin and the consequences of its lack, so it is worth describing.
Diabetic ketoacidosis results from a severe lack of insulin,
occurring chiefly in type one diabetes — at presentation,
or when insulin is omitted or when illness increases the requirement.
The severe insulin deficiency has two consequences that combine.
First, without insulin, the blood glucose rises greatly,
as glucose is neither taken up nor stored and the liver overproduces it;
the high glucose causes an osmotic diuresis,
with the loss of large volumes of water and electrolytes,
causing dehydration and electrolyte depletion.
Second, and characteristically, the lack of insulin unrestrains the breakdown of
fat, which is mobilised and converted by the liver into ketone bodies in large
amounts; the ketone bodies are acids,
and their accumulation causes a metabolic acidosis — the ketoacidosis.
So the picture is of a high blood glucose, dehydration and electrolyte loss,
and a metabolic acidosis from the ketones,
with the clinical features of dehydration,
deep breathing compensating for the acidosis, vomiting,
and a declining conscious level; it is dangerous and can be fatal.
The treatment addresses the components: fluid to correct the dehydration;
insulin to switch off the ketone production and lower the glucose;
and the careful correction of the electrolytes, particularly potassium.
So diabetic ketoacidosis results from a severe lack of insulin,
chiefly in type one diabetes: the insulin deficiency raising the blood glucose,
causing an osmotic diuresis with dehydration and electrolyte loss,
and unrestraining fat breakdown, producing ketone bodies that cause a metabolic
acidosis; a dangerous state treated by fluid,
insulin to stop the ketogenesis and lower the glucose,
and careful electrolyte correction — following directly from the actions of insulin.
Describe hypoglycaemia and its dangers, particularly under anaesthesia.
Hypoglycaemia — a low blood glucose — is dangerous because of the brain's
dependence on glucose, and it is of particular concern under anaesthesia,
where it may be masked, so its understanding and recognition are worth describing.
The brain depends almost entirely on glucose for its energy and has no significant
store, so it requires a continuous supply;
a fall in the blood glucose therefore threatens the brain,
and a severe or prolonged hypoglycaemia impairs its function and, if severe,
causes injury.
The body defends against hypoglycaemia with the counter-regulatory hormones —
glucagon, the catecholamines, cortisol and growth hormone — which raise the glucose.
The features of hypoglycaemia are of two kinds: the autonomic features,
from the sympathetic and adrenal response — sweating, tremor, palpitations,
anxiety — which serve as a warning; and the neuroglycopenic features,
from the brain's lack of glucose — confusion, altered behaviour, drowsiness, and,
if severe, seizures and coma.
In the diabetic patient, hypoglycaemia is usually caused by the treatment — too
much insulin or sulphonylurea relative to the food and activity.
Under anaesthesia, hypoglycaemia is particularly dangerous because its warning
features are masked: the autonomic warning signs may be absent or attributed to
other causes, and the patient cannot report symptoms or the confusion,
so a profound hypoglycaemia may go unrecognised;
this is why the blood glucose must be monitored in the diabetic patient through the
perioperative period.
So hypoglycaemia is dangerous because the brain depends on glucose;
defended against by the counter-regulatory hormones,
and causing autonomic warning features and neuroglycopenic features — confusion,
seizures and coma; usually caused, in diabetes, by the treatment;
and particularly dangerous under anaesthesia,
where the warning signs are masked and the patient cannot report symptoms,
so it may go unrecognised — hence the monitoring of glucose perioperatively.
Describe the chronic complications of diabetes mellitus.
The long-term, chronic complications of diabetes,
resulting from the prolonged exposure to a raised blood glucose,
are a major cause of its morbidity and are of anaesthetic relevance,
so an understanding of them is worth having.
The chronic complications result from the damage caused, over years,
by the raised blood glucose, chiefly to the blood vessels and the nerves.
They are conventionally divided into two groups.
The microvascular complications, affecting the small blood vessels,
are relatively specific to diabetes and affect particular organs: the retina,
causing diabetic retinopathy and a risk to vision; the kidney,
causing diabetic nephropathy, a major cause of renal failure; and the nerves,
causing diabetic neuropathy — including a peripheral neuropathy, and,
importantly for anaesthesia, an autonomic neuropathy.
The macrovascular complications are an acceleration of atherosclerosis,
the disease of the larger arteries,
so that diabetic patients have a greatly increased risk of coronary heart disease,
stroke and peripheral vascular disease — the cardiovascular disease being a major
cause of death.
These complications are highly relevant to anaesthesia: the cardiovascular disease,
which may be silent, increasing the cardiac risk; the renal impairment;
the autonomic neuropathy, causing cardiovascular instability and delayed gastric
emptying; and others.
So the chronic complications of diabetes, from the prolonged raised glucose,
are the microvascular complications — retinopathy threatening vision,
nephropathy causing renal failure, and neuropathy,
including the autonomic neuropathy — and the macrovascular complications — the
accelerated atherosclerosis causing coronary disease,
stroke and peripheral vascular disease; a major cause of morbidity,
and highly relevant to anaesthesia through the often-silent cardiovascular disease,
renal impairment and autonomic neuropathy.
Describe the perioperative management of the diabetic patient's glucose.
The management of the blood glucose through the perioperative period is an
important practical matter in the diabetic patient,
and its principles follow from the disturbance of glucose control by surgery and
fasting, so they are worth drawing together.
The aims are to maintain the blood glucose within a safe range — avoiding the
dangerous extremes — through the disturbances of surgery.
Two factors disturb the control.
The stress of surgery, through the counter-regulatory hormones,
raises the blood glucose and the insulin requirement.
And the fasting for surgery, and the interruption of the normal eating and
treatment, disturb the usual balance,
risking hypoglycaemia if the diabetic treatment is given without food.
The management balances these.
The blood glucose is monitored regularly through the perioperative period.
The diabetic treatment is adjusted: for minor surgery, with a short fast,
the usual treatment may be modified — for instance,
omitting or reducing certain agents — and the patient managed through a brief
period; for major surgery, or where the patient cannot eat for longer,
a regimen providing a controlled supply of insulin and glucose is often used — an
intravenous infusion of insulin with glucose,
adjusted to the monitored blood glucose — maintaining the glucose in range while
the patient fasts.
The aim throughout is to avoid both hyperglycaemia — and, in type one,
ketoacidosis — and the dangerous, masked hypoglycaemia.
So the diabetic patient's glucose is managed perioperatively by monitoring it
regularly and adjusting the treatment to the disturbances of surgical stress,
which raises the glucose, and fasting, which risks hypoglycaemia:
modifying the usual treatment for minor surgery,
and using a controlled insulin-and-glucose regimen for major surgery or prolonged
fasting; the aim being to avoid hyperglycaemia and ketoacidosis on the one hand and
the masked hypoglycaemia on the other — principles following from the disturbance
of glucose control by surgery.
Describe the structure and secretion of insulin.
Insulin is a peptide hormone with a particular structure and mode of synthesis and
secretion, and an outline of these is worth giving,
as it is relevant to its action, its measurement and the forms used in treatment.
Insulin is a small protein hormone,
consisting of two amino-acid chains joined by bridges.
It is synthesised by the beta cells of the islets, like other peptide hormones:
it is made first as a larger precursor, which is processed within the cell,
the processing cleaving off a fragment — the connecting peptide,
or C-peptide — to yield the active insulin,
the two being stored together in secretory granules and released together.
The co-release of the C-peptide is useful clinically,
as its measurement indicates the body's own insulin production,
distinguishing it from injected insulin.
The insulin is stored in the granules and released, as described,
by exocytosis when the beta cell is stimulated, chiefly by glucose.
Once secreted, insulin acts on its target tissues and is then cleared,
with a short half-life, chiefly by the liver.
Insulin acts on a cell-surface receptor,
which has intrinsic enzyme — tyrosine kinase — activity,
triggering the intracellular signals that produce its effects,
including the insertion of glucose transporters.
The understanding of its structure and synthesis underlies the manufacture of
insulin and its analogues for treatment.
So insulin is a small two-chain protein,
synthesised by the beta cells from a precursor,
the processing yielding insulin and the co-released C-peptide — whose measurement
indicates the body's own insulin production;
stored in granules and released by exocytosis on stimulation by glucose,
then cleared chiefly by the liver; acting on a surface receptor with tyrosine
kinase activity — a structure and secretion relevant to its action,
measurement and the forms used in treatment.
Describe the comparison of type one and type two diabetes.
The two main types of diabetes differ fundamentally in their mechanism,
and a clear comparison is useful, as it underlies their different presentations and
treatments, so it is worth drawing out.
Both types result in a raised blood glucose from a lack of insulin action,
but the mechanism differs.
Type one diabetes results from an absolute deficiency of insulin,
caused by the destruction — usually autoimmune — of the beta cells,
so that little or no insulin is produced; it typically presents in younger people,
often with a relatively acute onset, and, because there is no insulin,
the patients depend on insulin treatment and are prone to ketoacidosis if it is
lacking.
Type two diabetes, far commoner, results from a combination of resistance of the
tissues to insulin and an inadequate, though not absent,
insulin secretion that fails to overcome the resistance;
it is strongly associated with obesity and tends to present later in life,
often gradually.
Because some insulin is present, ketoacidosis is less typical.
It is managed initially by lifestyle measures and oral or other non-insulin drugs
that improve insulin action or secretion, though insulin may eventually be needed.
So the comparison is of an absolute insulin deficiency from beta-cell destruction
in type one, requiring insulin and prone to ketoacidosis,
against insulin resistance with relative deficiency in the obesity-associated type
two.
So type one diabetes is an absolute insulin deficiency from the autoimmune
destruction of the beta cells — presenting younger, insulin-dependent,
prone to ketoacidosis; while type two diabetes is insulin resistance with
inadequate secretion — commoner, obesity-associated, presenting later,
managed initially without insulin and less prone to ketoacidosis;
a fundamental difference in mechanism underlying their different presentations and
treatments.
Describe the principles of insulin treatment.
The treatment of diabetes with insulin aims to replace or supplement the insulin so
as to control the blood glucose while avoiding hypoglycaemia,
and its principles follow from the normal pattern of insulin secretion,
so they are worth describing.
The aim is to reproduce, as far as possible, the normal pattern of insulin action,
so as to keep the blood glucose in a good range,
avoiding both the hyperglycaemia that causes the complications and the
hypoglycaemia that is dangerous.
The normal pattern, which the treatment tries to mimic, has two components:
a continuous, low background level of insulin between meals and overnight — the
basal secretion — controlling the glucose released by the liver;
and the surges of insulin at meals, controlling the glucose absorbed.
Insulin treatment uses preparations designed to provide these components:
long-acting insulins to provide the basal level, and short-acting insulins,
given with meals, to cover them — the basal-bolus pattern — or mixtures and other
regimens.
The insulin is given by injection, as it is a peptide and would be digested if
swallowed. The dose must be balanced against the food and the activity,
and adjusted for circumstances that change the requirement — illness,
stress and others.
The blood glucose is monitored to guide the treatment.
The chief hazard is hypoglycaemia, from too much insulin relative to food and
activity.
So insulin treatment aims to mimic the normal pattern of insulin action — a basal
level between meals and surges at meals — using long-acting insulins for the basal
level and short-acting for meals, given by injection;
the dose balanced against food and activity and adjusted for changing requirements,
guided by glucose monitoring, with hypoglycaemia the chief hazard — principles
following from the normal pattern of insulin secretion.
Describe the non-insulin drugs used in type two diabetes.
Type two diabetes is treated, at least initially,
with a range of non-insulin drugs that act in different ways to lower the blood
glucose, and an outline of these, by their mechanism, is worth giving,
following from the physiology of glucose control.
Because type two diabetes involves insulin resistance with inadequate secretion,
the drugs act by improving insulin action, increasing insulin secretion,
or by other means, and they are often combined.
Several classes act in different ways.
Metformin, commonly the first drug,
acts chiefly by reducing the liver's production of glucose and improving the
sensitivity to insulin, without itself causing hypoglycaemia.
The sulphonylureas stimulate the beta cells to secrete more insulin,
by closing the ATP-sensitive potassium channels, as discussed;
they can cause hypoglycaemia.
Drugs acting on the incretin system enhance the insulin response to meals — either
mimicking the incretin hormones or preventing their breakdown.
Drugs acting on the kidney — inhibiting the reabsorption of glucose — cause glucose
to be excreted in the urine, lowering the blood glucose.
Other classes improve insulin sensitivity or affect absorption.
The choice and combination depend on the patient.
So the non-insulin drugs for type two diabetes act by different mechanisms
following from the physiology: metformin reducing hepatic glucose production and
improving insulin sensitivity; the sulphonylureas stimulating insulin secretion by
closing potassium channels; the incretin-based drugs enhancing the meal insulin
response; and the renal glucose-reabsorption inhibitors causing urinary glucose
loss; often combined — an outline by mechanism, following from glucose control,
relevant to the perioperative handling of these drugs.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The endocrine pancreas (islets of Langerhans):
beta cells → insulin (hormone of the fed state, lowers blood glucose,
promotes storage); alpha cells → glucagon (hormone of the fasting state,
raises blood glucose, mobilises fuel); plus somatostatin and other peptides.
Insulin and glucagon are broadly Second, Insulin (anabolic, fed state):
in the liver stores glucose as glycogen and inhibits glucose production;
in muscle promotes glucose uptake (transporters), storage and protein synthesis;
in fat promotes fat synthesis/storage — thereby lowering blood glucose (the ONLY
glucose-lowering hormone).
Glucagon (fasting) raises glucose via hepatic glycogen breakdown,
gluconeogenesis and fat mobilisation;
the counter-regulatory hormones (catecholamines, cortisol,
growth hormone) also raise glucose — defending against hypoglycaemia and raising
glucose in stress.
Third, Insulin secretion is controlled chiefly by blood glucose (direct negative
feedback): glucose metabolism in the beta cell raises ATP → closes ATP-sensitive K+
channels → depolarisation → Ca2+ entry → insulin release (the target of
sulphonylureas).
Also stimulated by other nutrients, incretin gut hormones, and autonomic modulation.
Fourth, Integrated glucose control:
fed state — ↑ glucose stimulates insulin/suppresses glucagon → uptake and storage
clear the glucose; fasting — ↓ glucose suppresses insulin/stimulates glucagon →
liver releases glucose (glycogenolysis then gluconeogenesis) while other tissues
use fat, maintaining glucose for the brain.
Fifth, Diabetes mellitus = lack of insulin action:
type 1 (autoimmune beta-cell destruction, absolute deficiency, needs insulin,
risk of ketoacidosis); type 2 (insulin resistance + inadequate secretion,
obesity-associated).
Anaesthetic implications: perioperative glucose control (stress/fasting raise need
— avoid hyperglycaemia, ketoacidosis, and masked hypoglycaemia;
often insulin-glucose regimen) AND complications (silent cardiovascular disease,
renal impairment, autonomic neuropathy → instability + aspiration risk,
infection risk).
Thank you. That concludes the station.